---
title: "Why I decided to pursue web development as my prospective career"
description: "Why I decided to pursue web development"
pubDate: "May 8 2016"
---

I graduated with a undergraduate degree in Mechanical engineering 2 years ago now.  Since then I have spent time applying for jobs, applying for master’s degrees, and updating my resume and cover letter more times than I can remember.  After all of this, I am in no better position for a company to want to hire me than the day I graduated.  If anything I am now less valuable since the few skills I learned in school that might be applicable in field (if there are any) are now less fresh in my mind and I have to compete with new graduates for positions.

Engineering is hard.  That is why all engineers have to go through at least 4 years of school, join a professional organization, get hired and work under a professional engineer, get 4 years of experience and then take a test which shows that they are capable of approving something to be used by society.  This is all necessary, since if an engineer messed up the potential for fallout is quite massive.  However this also means that most people can only get experience in engineering by working in the industry.  Most people don’t learn how to build engines or hvac systems or industry standard pipelines in their spare time.

Engineering students can join organizations in school which group together to make small airplanes or formula cars, get an internship to get experience in that field, and all students work on some sort of project in their final year.  It is then their job to take what they learned from these experiences and convince an employer that they can take these skills and apply it to the company.  There is a huge amount of emphasis in their ability to describe their motivation and experience into their cover letter and resume without anything to show off and prove that they know the material.  I was one of the ones that didn’t make the cut.

3 months ago I was waiting to hear back from a master’s degree application.  I had as much going for me than anything else that I had applied for in the last 2 years.  I was recommended by a former professor of mine, I had experience in the area of research from my internship in Switzerland, and I got all the way to the interview stage.  The interview went ok, however I wasn’t able to answer a few of the theoretical questions that I hadn’t reviewed in a year and a half.  They told me it could be a few months before they reach a final decision.

I began thinking about my options if I was declined.  The economy will eventually recover and I can keep applying to jobs until I get lucky.  However I needed to start working towards something to get a sense of progress in my life again.  I had always played around with the idea of learning programming on my own.  If you look around there are plenty of success stories of people teaching themselves to program and eventually getting hired.  Why couldn’t I be one of those people?

I had taken a c++ course during my mechanical engineering degree, but I wasn’t enthusiastic about it at the time.  During my internship I learned the basics of C and implemented some functions to run alongside the fluid simulations, and I had started a few online courses to learn Java, Python, and front end development in the past just to see if I was interested in it as a hobby.  However I usually only worked on it for a few days and lost interest.

I was reading a thread on reddit on something about teaching yourself to program.  One comment  linked to <a href="https://www.udemy.com/the-complete-ruby-on-rails-developer-course/">the-complete-ruby-on-rails-developer-course</a>.  I realized that I didn’t really know enough about programming to be able to decide which language to really commit to, so I picked that course and devoted myself to going through it.  It has been 2 months now and I have gone through the majority of the course, but have spent the last few weeks on this portfolio and a few other side projects.

After the initial hurdle, I am now loving programming almost every single day.  Things are starting to click, I no longer reach for video games to pass the time, only as a small 1 or 2 hour break in between programming sessions.  The biggest thing is that through browsing web development jobs, I am working daily and improving myself on things that the employer requires you to be familiar with for the job.  If i run into a problem, I can break it down into problems that have already been solved and is just a google search away.  If something works or doesn’t work, there is instant feedback with (usually) an explanation of what went wrong.

In 2 months I have gone from nearly 0 knowledge in the field to creating this website.  Each day that I work on a project or learn something new I am increasing my value to potential employers.  I feel like I am progressing myself every day, and I feel like after a few more months I will be valuable enough that a company would actually want me.  If they don’t, then I just need to practice and build more projects.
